Good morning. Welcome back. This is
lecture four in the experienced section
of statistical rethinking 2026.
Uh we've had in the first three lectures
um an introduction to multi-level
models, uh partial pooling, random
slopes, uh coariance prior,
I think that's about it. Yeah, and maybe
there's something else in there I
missed. Um, for the rest of this
section, you can think of it as
applications of multi-level modeling.
Uh, although the particular applications
aren't may not usually be explained as
multi-level modeling, but they are
because they have hierarchical priors in
them. Most of these examples,
um, what I want to do today is a bit of
a hybrid lecture. Uh,
I want to spend the first part of it,
maybe the first half, talking about a
phenomenon called group level
confounding. I'll explain what that is.
Uh you're going to like it. [laughter]
Well, you're not going to like it, but
you need to know about it. And uh and
and this is a topic that relates to
multi-level modelings because we're
talking about groups or clusters in the
data and how there can be compounds at
the group level um and what we can do
about that statistically. And then I'm
going to pivot uh very rapidly to a
completely different topic, but also a
multi-level modeling topic, which is how
to model social networks. um which is a
huge thing that I could teach an entire
course on. Uh but I'm really only going
to do two lectures, right? So I'm going
to get started in this lecture and I
don't know how far I'll get but I
certainly won't finish and then in the
next lecture I'll finish it up. But I
want to give you um uh an experienced
introduction to uh social network
modeling and some of the trade-offs and
the structural issues with it as I go.
Okay.
unit level or group level confounds. So
think back to ordinary confounds. Now
the word confound is a plain English
word which in statistics is defined in a
wide range of very precise ways. It's
unfortunate. It's always true. Um
uh one uh use in statistics in
particular I I would call it the uh
epidemiological definition of a confound
is that a confound is an unadjusted
common cause of a treatment and an
outcome. So if you look at the DAG on
this slide let's say X is the cause of
interest or the treatment and Y is the
outcome of interest. If we have not
measured u uh then it will bias
systematically bias our estimates of the
causal effect of x on y. So u is a
common cause of x and y if we've
measured it right it to remember the the
do calculus and the logic of that um uh
there's a backdoor
from x the treatment of interest into
the outcome y do you see it do I people
remember backdoor paths yeah exciting
stuff yeah it's fine if you don't
remember because it's the kind of thing
that can leak out of your brain at any
moment right but remember a backdoor
path
is you look at the treatment of interest
and you find the arrows that are
entering it and you try to trace them
back. And if you can find a path even
going against the arrows uh that leads
to the outcome, that's a backdoor path
and that's a non-causal path that will
bias systematically bias your estimate
of the causal effect. And so your job
[laughter] is to figure out a way if
it's possible at all to get an unbiased
estimate. Uh and sometimes you can and
sometimes you can't. So if you can
measure the common causes, you can
adjust for them, which usually just
means stratify uh by those things. So if
you can measure the variable U in this
DAG, you're in business, right? We worry
about compounds like that all the time
in observational studies, in
experiments, you randomize. So you break
the backdoor pass. When you randomize on
X, you delete all the arrows entering
it.
Yeah, I'll say that again. When you
randomize on X effectively, you can
ineffectively randomize. You can try to
randomize to fail, [laughter] but that
happens a lot in experiments, but uh if
you effectively randomize, you delete
all of the arrows entering the
treatment. So there are no no back door
pass by definition, right? And that's
the goal. Um when we can't do
experiments, we need to do some trick
like uh use the backd dooror criterion
or some other strategy uh to simulate uh
deleting the backdoor pass. This is just
review, right? There's nothing new
there. These are ordinary confounds. Um,
I want to say uh sometimes you can't
guarantee that there's no unmeasured
confounding and then there will still be
systematic bias. Um, but sometimes
that's okay, right? You just want to be
transparent about it. It's like you see
this I see this in political science
more than other fields in their papers.
They say, "Look, it's not credible.
We've measured everything that's
relevant here. there's almost certainly
some sort of un unmeasured confounding
and then they'll do a sensitivity
analysis assuming the confounding is of
different strengths to see what impact
that has on estimates. So that's another
thing to do. Um maybe towards the end of
this section I could show you an example
of that. But I'll take a vote in mo a
few lectures in the future for things
you want me to perform for you in the
final lectures. Okay? So we'll get
there. But that's that's a fun one that
I think is a very mature and honest sort
of technique and it's not that hard. Um
okay, this is just a review of ordinary
what I call unit level compounds. There
are also um group level compounds. Now
we have a hierarchical data set. Uh
there are variables at the individual
level that can have common causes. Um
but you can have variables that are
common causes of the treatment and
outcome which are fixed at the group
level. their properties exposures of
every unit in the group. So uh uh so
like classrooms um the all the students
in the classroom are exposed to a number
of common things which are properties of
that classroom right could be the
temperature uh the gender ratio the
teacher um a huge number of things that
could affect a student performance and
maybe you can measure them all but maybe
you can't maybe you can't even think of
them all right so people who do good
educational research worry about this
sort of a lot uh classroom level
confounding or school level confounding
or all kinds of things like this. Does
this make sense? Um since you all uh
either are or were students, it is
easier for you to think about that sort
of example. But uh there's other things
like the hospital uh if you're doing
clinical research as a unit and all
kinds of things that go on at a hospital
because it has a common administration.
Yeah. Things like that. Okay. Um, group
level confounds are actually not as bad
as unit level confounds.
Yay, for once. There's a positive
message here. But you do have to make
assumptions.
This is always how we get identification
in the absence of a of a perfectly
randomized experiment is you make
assumptions. Uh, I like to say um, an
inference without assumptions is like an
opinion without reasons.
Yeah. either it's going to be boring and
obvious or it's not going to be
credible. [snorts]
Yeah, does that make sense? Right? So,
it's okay to make assumptions. You just
want to be transparent about them and
argue for them. But it's not a bad thing
to make strong assumptions because
that's the only way to get strong
inference in in an observational system.
Yeah. Is that that good? Is that a
motive? Um and in this case we're going
to make assumptions about the structure
of the group level confounding which are
very conventional in lots of fields and
sometimes quite credible. Uh but but you
should always question these things. Uh
so what happens when we have unobserved
group features? Uh these can also
influence individually varying causes.
So the the U here doesn't have an I
subscript anymore which means it's a
property of each group.
Um
uh there's a bunch of terminology in in
this area and these models because
different sub fields especially in the
social sciences just call the same model
different things. And I'm sorry it's
just even statistitians call the same
model different things. There's there's
huge number of models called random
effects, right? And they mean different
things. And this is unfortunate. The
word random in stats never clarifies
anything, does it? calling something
random
just doesn't help. Yeah. Um so I'm sorry
for that, but it's not my fault, right?
But I have to teach you the terminology.
Okay. Our mission is to estimate um the
effect of intervening on X on Y uh
without randomization, without an
experiment. And there is hope here.
Okay, so I have some examples and uh oh,
I should have put this up before. Think
about like the Bangladesh data. We're
focusing on contraceptive uptake at the
individual level. That's at the center
of the stag. C subi. And there may be
some individual trait X subi. It could
be education. It could be her number of
surviving kids. Uh uh her her proximity
to her mom that influences contraceptive
use. Yeah. And there are uh uh say
traits at the district level at the
cluster level some of which are measured
like Z or zed at the bottom of this
slide. And that could be things like uh
the economy, the number of clinics, um
uh all kinds of stuff that that you've
measured because maybe it's it's the
topic of your research. You want to know
whether districts that have more clinics
have more contraceptive uptake, right?
people do studies like that. You measure
those things, but there are probably
lots of unmeasured things about each
district, too. And maybe you haven't
measured them because you couldn't, it's
just prohibitively difficult, or because
you haven't thought of them, right? And
those are our D traits on the left, just
D for district.
Um, we could also use a U. Uh, uh, so
like on this slide, I've replaced a D
with a U for unmeasured.
And we can think about a kind of basic
group level confounding situation in
this DAG where there there's basically
two simultaneous models going on here.
There's a model for the outcome
contraceptive use C subi and there's an
outcome and there's a model with an
outcome for X because X is generative
too. It's inside the same model. And so
on the first line here, we think about
just the log odds of the probability of
contraception is this additive model
where there's some overall intercept
base rate across all districts and then
there's the effect of Z for each
district. Maybe that's number of
clinics. Um and then there's an
individual effect of X subi and that's
the target of interest. Yeah. And then
there's this uh invisible confounding
thing on the end U which is also
clustered at the district level. Does
this make sense? Yeah. I I show you this
so you can go back and forth between the
DAG and the equation and the DAG and the
equation. There are many equations which
would be consistent with this DAG but
this equation is consistent with the
DAG. That's all I'm saying here. Yeah.
Question.
>> So when you when you [clears throat]
measure like what you know for for
example Z, you could have two effects
that you want to measure. say that it's
D and Y.
>> Yeah.
>> And same for X. But in the case of the
unmeasured things because you don't know
how many they are, you would only have
one single.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. So that would account for
everything. You don't know.
>> Exactly. The question was uh for the U
here on this slide. I mean there could
be a bunch of stuff in there and and
there's they're just all piled together
basically, right? Yeah. Exactly. It's
like a trash can of unmeasured effects.
And this is one of the strong
assumptions because it's not clear that
all of those unmeasured things would
influence X in the same way. Uh the
functional response may be different.
And if you have reasons, theoretical
reasons to think that, um I would do a
generative simulation to see if that has
any impact on your inferial power. Yeah.
But we're going to we're going to use
the the basic model just for this
lecture that's on this slide is when we
think about how the the use uh influence
X, it's just a relationship to the mean.
That is that the average X subi in each
district is proportional to the group
level confound. This is the most typical
assumption, but you could make other
assumptions and I leave it to your
fertile imaginations or possibly a
future homework problem to think about
what what else could be going on. Okay?
Uh but if we make this assumption, oh,
happy day. We can do inference. Um
unlike in the individual level confound
case, you're you're not screwed here.
You can actually do inference on x subi
the causal effect of x subi on c subi in
this with with these assumptions though
you have to make assumptions remember
assumptions without uh I mean uh
inference without assumptions is like an
opinion without reasons okay maybe that
phrase is not working for anybody else
but I like it yeah question
>> um the arrow that goes from the unknown
group level effect to the x
is not really direct in the model for in
the in the formula, right?
>> No, it is because e x subi is
distributed normally with a mean that's
a proportion gamma of the of the
district's confound u. So u generates x
each x subi.
Okay.
>> Yeah, you could write it as x subi
equals gamma u subd plus normal zero tow
>> and maybe that would feel more
generative to you.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. Have I convinced you? Yeah. Maybe.
Okay. Well, think about it. Maybe I'm
missing Yeah, think about it and let me
know what the what the issue is. Okay.
Um
can I proceed? Yeah. I've got a few more
intro slides here before we start
cooking. Uh just a few examples. I
talked about classrooms before. Lots of
stuff in classrooms. Noise, bullying,
teacher. Uh maybe we're interested in
the relationship between student
preparation that is studying and test
scores. Um there's some stuff about the
classroom like temperature we have
measured. Uh because that that's also
part of the study. Uh this is a common
situation. Yeah. Um in polyai there are
lots of questions about historical
relationships uh between uh ruling
parties and economic performance. Pick
your favorite country or least favorite
country as the case may be but don't
blurt out any party names. And uh the
problem here is that uh nations are
heavily confounded entities, right? Um I
mean I can't imagine trying to do
historical inference on this thing we
call Germany which is a brand new
country. Sorry I'm lecturing in Germany
people at home. It's like what is
Germany even? How old is it? 1990 right?
This is like and even before that I mean
Prussia conquered Bavaria. That's the
beginning of Germany. Something like
that's a sore topic for Bavarians. I
should shut up. Right. But um this is a
hard situation but people in polyai who
want to work on this don't give up. They
try to they make structural models and
they think hard about what strong
assumptions are needed for inference and
it's this is a group level confounding
situation. There's other confounding in
that situation but group level
confounding is one of the things that
goes on. Okay.
So this literature um I'm going to give
you one streamlined tour through the
solutions to this and address the
confusions that arise. Uh but but I
can't address them all because there's
terminological variance in different
fields. But hopefully since I'm going to
show you the models, if you meet some
new term and then you can find the model
definition, you can figure out what it
is. Right? I'm going to teach you the
structural logic by which the estimates
arise in this so that you can unconfuse
yourself, unconfound yourself. Ha. uh
when you when you're [clears throat]
reading uh methods papers. Okay. All
right. So again our estimate here we
want to we want to estimate the
influence of X on Y. What sort of
estimator should we use? Um typical
things you'll see first there's this
thing called the fixed effects model.
This is a no pooling model with an
intercept for each group.
Um very common in economics and and
polyai as well. uh there's multi-level
models which I have taught you in the
three previous lectures. These are
partial pooling models. And then there's
this thing called a Mundlac machine. Uh
Mlac was a person. I think he still is a
person. Sorry if I prematurely
obituaried. Uh this methods researcher.
He's an economist. Was or is I'm sorry.
I should have looked this up. [laughter]
But uh I hope he's healthy.
um Munlac machines wrote a great paper
uh some decades ago uh before I was born
uh great paper on this really clear
paper still probably the first paper you
want to read it's a very nice paper on
this topic um and the Munlike machine
it's in its spirit is pursues the
strategy that I've been teaching in this
course it just uses the generative model
and models the confounding it puts the
confound in the generative model and
then sticks it in the statistical model,
but it does it in a clever way. Yeah.
So, I want to work up to this. Um, okay.
Uh, it's hard to find there. There are a
number of papers in every field, it
seems, is going to write its own paper
about this topic. Uh, uh, here's a
relatively recent one from, I think,
2020 that that I'm happy to recommend.
The writing is very clear. It it um is
mature with you with the notation that
is, it teaches you the standard
notation. So you just have to be ready
for matrices. I'm sorry. It's just how
it is out there in the journals. But
it's this is a good paper that I'm happy
to recommend. It's very clear. Get
straight to the business. Um
uh you'll find others though if you if
you ask uh ask the internet. Okay. The
first thing I want to do is make some
synthetic data, right? To understand if
an estimator works. uh you can't
guarantee it's going to work on real
data, but if it doesn't work on fake
data where the assumptions are met, it's
probably not going to work on real data.
Yeah. So, this is a first order thing.
This is the synthetic data validation
sort of thing that I showed you before.
Um what we're doing here is I'm just
instantiating the DAG with a particular
set of distributional assumptions. I'm
going to take 30 groups, 2,000
individuals. Um this is going to be a
binary outcome variable Y like like
contraceptive uptake. uh alpha 0 is the
base rate across all groups in the data
all the 30 groups right so it's minus2
which means the outcome outcome being
one is rarer than outcome zero yeah
because this is log odds so the average
log odds is minus two um and then we've
got two effects of interest Bzy is the
effect of the group level covariant z or
zed on the outcome y and bxy is the
effect of the individual covariant X on
the individual outcome Y. You with me?
And for convenience, I'm setting BZ Y to
one and BXY to zero. I give you the
code. You can play around with this.
It'll just make it easy to see in the
graphs whether the model works, right? I
can I'll draw a vertical line on the
true effect. So the true effect of X is
zero. You can make it one. The models
still behave the same way, but it's just
easy to see it at zero. And the and the
true effect of Z is one. Um then I
sample individuals into groups. That's
that G vector.
And so these are imbalanced. This is an
imbalanced data set. Yeah. By design. I
want it to be imbalanced. I want to be
real. Yeah. You make a balanced data
set. Yeah. You'll never see that in your
life, right? Unless you have an
experiment. But uh and then the U subgs
are simulated as normal. Um
and uh uh then I we generate the x's
using the ug for each group g.
Does that make sense? So the mean of the
x's in each group is the unobserved
compound.
Right? You look at the dag on the right.
Um then we generate z. Uh um these are
just zero on deviates, one for each
group. And then we roll the uh we flip a
coin 2,00 times to generate the
outcomes. Why? Using all of that junk.
You with me? You love this stuff, right?
Absolutely. I wish the people at home
could see the happy faces of the
audience looking at this code. Just so
happy. Um okay, so at the bottom I show
you with groups. Uh u sorry this is for
100 groups, not 30 in this example.
Sorry, these are new slides. um 100
groups and individuals in each group
plotted as points. Uh and these are the
x values and you see that the x's vary
systematically. The mean is varying
systematically across groups. Why?
Because I simulated it that way. But
it's nice to plot the simulated data and
verify it's working properly because you
can mess up the simulation or I should
say I can mess up the simulation and I
like to think other people can too.
Yeah. So it's always good to check. Um,
and we can see that that is passed on
because of the confounding because you
the U's, oh, sorry, now it suddenly
became a G. Again, these are new slides.
Um, the U's are affecting the average X
on the top and they're also affecting
the Y's. So, when we plot X against Y on
the bottom, we see an association,
right? Do you see higher X values tend
to be associated with Y equals 1? Yeah.
But I fixed in the simulation that the
effect of X on Y is zero. So this is the
confounding showing up in the simulated
data. Yay, we have simulated bad data.
Yeah. But now we're going to try to
design a statistical model which escapes
this problem. And we'll do several
models in fact. Um so the first is this
thing called the fixed effects model. Uh
which is perfectly kosher and has a few
drawbacks. And I want to explain to you
why it works and what the drawbacks are.
Okay. Um the goal [clears throat] here
we're going to estimate uh some um
estimate an intercept for each group
with no pooling using only the data from
that group. Why would we do this after
three lectures of telling you how
wonderful partial pooling is? Yeah, I
want to try to explain why. Don't worry,
the partial pooling is coming back,
right? It's just this strategy will work
too, but it doesn't have the pooling. um
it works to soak up the group level
confounding. Uh major drawback is that
we can't identify the effect of Z
anymore because that will be absorbed
into the intercept. If you look at the
equation on the right, you see that a
subgi and and bz z subgi
sum together at the group level to a
single intercept for each group. So you
can't identify them, right? You can only
identify their sum,
right? So the fixed effect strategy, why
is it called fixed effect? I actually
don't know, but I like to think it's
because the these effects are fixed at
the group level. They don't vary by the
units inside the group. That's that's
how I was taught. Now maybe that's not
true if we go back in time, but but that
will help you think about it, right? Uh
a varying effect in this tradition are
the x of eyes. they vary across
individuals or if the subscripts were
time, if this was a panel study, a time
series data set, then they would vary
across time. But a fixed effect doesn't
vary except across groups. It's fixed
within the group. Does that make sense?
Does that help you understand? Okay. Uh
and and so those fixed effects, all
you're estimating here is all of the
fixed effects. All of them. The ones
you've measured, the ones you haven't.
There's one intercept for all of them.
And that means we can't estimate um the
effect of Z. But maybe you don't want
the effect of Z and in which case this
is a perfectly fine model and I have
nothing against it. Um let's uh actually
show you some code for it and show you
that it works. So the world's simplest
uh OLAM model, right? Uh there's uh this
this has no partial pooling because
you'll notice that there there's no no
hierarchical prior, right?
Um
I'm still doing shrinkage. Uh so it's
not like the frequentist version of
this. There's still some regularization
going on, but very very little. That's
an ex normal 010 is basically flat,
right? That's a variance of 100. That's
a very flat normal distribution on the
remember we're on the log odd scale. So
that's an insanely flat prior on the log
odd scale. Yeah. Um
uh and at the bottom of this slide, what
I'm showing you are the posterior
distributions for an example simulated
data set. I've given you the code. I
encourage you to play with this. I'm not
cheating here. This is representative.
Yeah, this is a big literature
representing this. I had the idea last
night that I would do a massive
simulation study and run each of these
models a thousand times and show you
histograms. And then I decided to go to
sleep.
Yeah. So next year [laughter] I will do
that for you. But this year I went to
sleep. Okay. So, but this is not
cheating and I've given you the code.
This is this is representative. Um, so
on the left I'm showing you in the
horizontal this is the uh value of of
the effect of X on Y. The coefficient
BXY. This may not be the causal effect
of X on Y because this is a a nonlinear
model. So remember if we were going to
do marginal effects it'd use all the
parameters but still the accuracy
differences would exist. Um, and I've
got two here. Uh, the fixed model there,
which is straddling the true effect at
zero. And this other posterior
distribution that I've called naive. The
naive model um, uh, doesn't do any
clustering at the group level and
ignores the existence of the group level
confound. Just tries to estimate the the
causal relation between Xi and Yi by
running a logistic regression. Yeah. And
you see that it's systematically biased
by the confound. That's not surprising.
But I wanted to show you how big that
bias is. You see? Yeah. In this
particular example. Um, and then in the
lower right, I'm showing you the
inference for the effect of Z on Y. And
the naive model almost nails it, right?
Does pretty well. It's a finite data
set. It's doing pretty good. True effect
is one. The fixed model is hopeless
because remember, it can't decompose the
intercept. And there's just there's two
components of the intercept here. uh the
alphas uh and and betaz time zed. Those
are the two components of the sum. And
as you know, there are an infinite
number of ways to add two numbers and
get the same sum, right? I said, give me
a list of real numbers that sum to 10.
You'll be there the rest of your life,
right? There's an infinite number of
them. Um does this make sense so far? I
haven't explained why this works yet. So
if you're asking why does this work,
Richard, I haven't explained it yet, but
I'll I'll try to do that next. But I
just want to make sure that there's no
structural issues here so far. Um when I
was learning this this material in grad
school, I hated it. Oh my god, it was
painful. Partly because like it was in
the it was in the context of an analysis
of variance course and it was like 10
weeks of sums of squares and I have
trauma from this. It's really traumatic.
Um I understand that this material is
weird. There's it's it's a kind of weird
combination of of arbitrary terminology,
complex statistical concepts and and
computational issues all at once. Yeah,
good times, right? That's just how
research is on the cutting edge and and
I can't break these things apart,
unfortunately. Okay, let me try to
explain to you uh in a very quick way
why this works, give you an intuition
for it. So what I've done with the
linear model here, this is the same DAG
and I've taken the the linear model for
the log odds of of um the probability of
the outcome Yi and now I've done
something that's totally legal. I have
subtract I have factored out the average
X.
Right? So I've I've taken the term with
X subi and I've taken each X subi and
I've subtracted the group mean uh Xbar
from that. Sorry, I should have put a
subscript on that X bar. That's the x
bar for that group. And then I've just
put in a term for xar. So nothing's been
lost here. It's the same equation,
right? Does that make sense? I know it
looks way worse. That's true. But now u
subg essentially appears twice in this
equation
because it's at the end. it's biasing um
y subi u but it it was also hidden in
the x's because the average x subi in a
group is proportional to you for that
group.
Right? This is what the fixed effect
strategy is. It just wants to take all
of those fixed effects which are
constant across individuals in the same
group and smuggle them off into a
parameter and not worry about them. All
of them. And once you condition on them,
the only statistical information left in
this equation after you've conditioned
on those fixed effects are the are the
fluctuating or varying effects across
individuals. That is the differences
between the individual X subi and the
group mean of the X's. And that's that
term in the middle. Did this help? Yeah,
I'm I'm not done trying to get this
across, but yeah.
>> Is that the
model?
>> Yeah. So the the the x subi minus x bars
will have a will have a standard
deviation tow sort of. Yes. Yes.
Absolutely.
That's right. Um I mean intellectually
I'm going to have some graphs later to
try and get this point across. that uh
uh this estimator was originally
designed I think just because um people
were clever and they realized oh we're
interested in the component of variation
um which is across individuals or across
time periods so let's subtract away all
the other variation all the other all
the between group variation we're just
going to subtract it away and you can do
it manually and in fact let me show you
that method here's another way to run
the same model and get the same estimate
don't you love it when I do phrased
um [clears throat]
this is the subtraction method for fixed
effects. Now there's no varying
intercepts by group here, right? See the
A has no brackets on it. There's just a
constant intercept across groups, but I
have subtracted the Xbar for each group
from X.
You get the same estimate for beta
subxy. And the code there's a script for
this on the on the course repository if
you want to play with this. If you don't
believe your lying eyes [laughter]
here, uh, this trick works because
again, it's just about removing all the
between group variation that's fixed
within groups so that all that's left is
that interindividual variation and
that's what we're going to analyze.
Yeah, let me show you what this
graphically this trick graphically.
Sorry to spend as much time on this, but
I want to take as much time as is needed
for this because it's such an important
topic, I think. So again, synthetic
data, 30 groups this time. Again, you
see systematic variation in the average
X in the top graph because of the group
level confound. And on the bottom, I'm
showing you exactly as before. This
induces an association between the Y's
and the X's, but that's that's spurious.
Yeah, it's a consequence of the
confound.
Um, now I can take all the X's at the
top and subtract the group mean uh for
each of them, for its group, right? So
just x subi minus xar in that group. And
that's the bottom graph. And I' I've
drawn a line at zero. So you see that
they're all centered at zero. Now
because all the between systematic fixed
between group variation is gone from the
x's now. Now let's plot these x's
against y. You can guess what's going to
happen.
Yay. The association goes away. Yeah.
Uh this is what the statistical model
does. Now, you could just do this with
the graph, but obviously we want a
posterior distribution, so you still
want the stat model. But this is all
it's doing. This is the idea. Um, it's
kind of a trick estimator, right? It's
not a generative it's not a model that's
based on the generative model in a
precise way. It it comes from this kind
of statistical cleverness of designing
the estimator to focus on one particular
thing you're trying to estimate. And
that's totally fine. Yeah. But it's not
the general generative strategy that
I've been emphasizing. That doesn't mean
I'm against it. Okay. Um let's compare
it to other things. Partial pooling
model. This does not work. And I want to
show you uh this does not work because
it does not uh numerically condition out
the group means. It's trying to do
something else. The partial pooling
model is trying to estimate um the group
level intercepts uh for predictive
purposes, right? It's a regularizing
model. Uh and that isn't the goal here.
So if you use this model, it's just a
model that's misapplied. Um, and I want
to show you that it's also biased. It's
better than the naive model because it
does partially adjust, right? The
partial pooling will partially adjust.
Uh, but it under adjusts.
Um, you understand these models, they
haunt your sleep, right? So I don't need
to spend much time talking about this
regular random effects model. But if by
all means, if you if a question pops up
or or I've messed up the notation
somewhere, let me know. Um the code here
will be familiar.
Uh now we we just um uh create a
hierarchical prior and I'm doing it here
in a non-entered way which is what this
transpar
uh uh zscore thing is for. But you know
it's still a hierarchical prior, right?
It just looks strange. We've done this
in previous lectures. Yeah. Is this
familiar? Don't let me assert this if
it's not familiar. I'm happy to reexlain
what's going on. Um, and now I've put a
red posterior distribution at the bottom
in our increasingly ugly graphs uh to
show them what the multi-level model
does. And it's in between the two. Yeah.
Because it partially adjusts for the
group means. Yeah. But it it gets better
out of sample predictions for the group
means than the other model than the
fixed model does, which is ironic, but
it doesn't infer the causal effect we
want as well as the other model does.
You have trade-offs uh in model design.
Yeah. This is the typical thing if I was
going to develop slogans from this
course. Uh uh one of them would be that
uh one model is not usually not going to
do everything you want in your research.
And so there are reasons to have
multiple models in a single analysis
because you have different estimates.
Yeah. And different models may request
estimates may require different models.
Okay. Uh we can very easily fix the
multi-level model though by looking back
at our at our generative model and uh
making the multi-level model closer to
it that is including the group level
confound or a proxy for it actually. So
this is the mundlac machine based upon
this 78 or I said I wasn't born I'm
ashamed to say I or not ashamed I'm
happy to say I was born in 1978 but I
was a child. Yeah. um tiny cold war
child living in West Germany, right? And
uh uh this is a great paper. I do
recommend it. It's clear. It has a clear
goal. It's super original. Uh it's a
fantastic paper. And here's the idea. Um
we like partial pooling, but we realize
that that will underjust. But if we look
back at the generative model, we realize
that the group averages Xbar is what I'm
calling it. Xar subg for each group is
causally downstream of the confound. So
it's a proxy for the confound. And so if
we include it as a predictor, it lets us
adjust for the confound.
I'll say that again. It's causally
downstream of the confound of the fixed
effect fixed confound. And so it's a
proxy for it.
And so if we include it as a predictor
in the regression model, uh it lets us
adjust for the unmeasured confound.
This requires a strong assumption that
the xarss are a good proxy of the
confound. And that requires that strong
assumption that it's proportional to
right that there's an additivity there.
If it's nonlinear, it might not be very
good and you might again be back in
partial adjustment land. So this isn't
assumption free, but it's often it's
often justifiable. Yeah. Um
so that's what we're going to do. We're
going to include the group average X in
the model. And this is the new loget
equation at the bottom. Uh where I've
tacked on on the end the Xbar for each
group and given its own coefficient.
And we still have partial pooling alphas
in this. This is us I would say this is
usually the right design if you're
trying to if you've got group structured
data that's observational and you want
to estimate the causal effect of some
unit level varying thing. This is your
go-to place. But I would still I'm going
to emphasize this later. I would still
compare it to the other models to learn
about how much of a difference it makes.
Right? Um but you're going to get
estimates for this as I show you on this
slide very similar to the fixed effect
model. uh here practically identical um
uh for the causal effect of interest,
the effect of X on Y. Um and now you can
include group levels things like Z and
identify them as well because we're not
absorbing everything into a non-pooled
intercept as a statistical trick. Yeah.
So this is what's good. It's flexible in
this way and you can now use this model
to do multiple things. right after I
sermonized about needing multiple models
for multiple estims. You can do multiple
estimates with this model. Yeah. Was
that a question or just a a hand flag?
That was okay. Sorry. You those of you
know I think all of you probably teach
too when you're a teacher you're
constantly like any kind of motion from
the audience you're like is that a
question? [laughter]
It's it's it's a horrible kind of
psychological problem. Right. Okay. Is
this Yeah. making some sense? Is it
coming across? you're going to study
this later and and some realize some
things didn't make sense and that will
be my fault, but I'm here for you when
you bring those questions to me. Um, one
last thing I want to do and we're 40
minutes in, so I'm not going to do much
social uh networks today, but I'll at
least be able to introduce it. Uh, a a
version of the Mudlac machine which is
richly basian. So, of course, I prefer
it although I'm going to start out by
saying that it the the marginal
improvement it's better than the
ordinary MULAC machine, but not very
much. And it's a it's yeah but still you
know I like to do the best I can even if
the marginal impact is small. The latent
munlac machine just says well look I
mean if we're really going to use the
generative model we'd acknowledge that
we don't know xbar because we have a
finite sample of x's in each group and
there's imbalance in the data set. So
the xbar is known with more precision in
some groups than others. And if we could
carry that uncertainty forward we could
do even better. Right? That's the way a
basian thinks, right? The basian says.
And then three weeks of coding later.
[laughter] Yes, it's true. This this
course is supposed to be an
advertisement for bass. So, I should
probably not make jokes like this, but
um uh so this is what we're going to do.
Let me try to break this down and and
help you see what's going on. We're
going to take the DAG on the right and
decompose it into two models. Yeah. Did
you like that?
Yeah. That Yeah, I worked on that for a
little while. That was [laughter]
Can we do it again? It was so good. Look
at that. Ah, yay. All right. Yes. Um,
this is dumb professor tricks today. Um,
so okay, we call these the the y
submodel and the x submodel and we can
put them in the same markoff chain.
There's nothing wrong with that. And
they will share share parameters and so
they'll share information. This is a
trick I've used in some other models and
I will use in future models as well. So
the Y model is your ordinary logistic
regression thing up there. And I want
you to see now there's this vector in
this model of unknown use at the end. U
bracket group. Those are parameters,
right? Because we don't we haven't
measured the compound effect, but hey,
I've made a parameter for it, right? And
we're going to try to estimate it. Now
there's going to be a posterior
distribution for each one. And it's
going to be treated like data in that
loit equation as a predictor. But it'll
have the the right uncertainty which
comes from the precision of its estimate
depending upon how many x's we have to
inform it in the next model which is the
x submodel in the middle of the model
code which is just a linear regression
of x on these parameters u.
Yeah, I know this seems like madness but
it's it totally works. This is a latent
variable model. The psychologists uh
will recognize latent variable models.
You have all kinds of factor models,
latent variable models, personality
models are like this. Item response
models are like this. They have these
these parameter vectors in them which
are properties of clusters. Those
clusters could be individuals or
classrooms or all kinds of stuff. And
when you have the properly structured
data set, you can learn about these um
things that you can't directly measure.
Uh and this is just an an example of
that strategy. Strategy doesn't always
work. Again, it requires assumptions. Um
but it can work. Uh this samples Oh,
wait. I had some animation. Okay,
there's the G's. They appear in both
equations. And so these two submodels
share information and information flows
between them in an optimal way
conditional on the uh assumptions being
true. And you run this and yay, now we
have another color. Sorry, I started to
run out of colors. So now we're into
ugly green, whatever that green is. And
this is the the latent munlac machine.
Um performs basically identically in for
this synthetic data set to the ordinary
mudlack machine, but now it's basian,
right? Sorry, I'm joking. But look, if
you have a different kind of data set,
when the groups are small, when you have
a smaller data set, um then it makes
more of a difference. So here I've I've
simulated a data set with 10 groups and
in one of the groups there's one
individual
right and so estimating a mean from one
individual is a bad idea and this model
knows that right but the ordinary
mudlack model does not know that and
it's overconfident and so we do see a
marginal improvement in this case where
uh the latent mudlack model is gives you
the best estimates remember the truth is
zero here mundlac is a little bit uh a
little bit worse and the fixed effect
model is is worse in both of them. Yeah.
But if if you have a big data set with
tons of replicants per group, you're not
going to see any difference between
these three models, right? But still,
it's nice to check, right? It doesn't
cost you much to check. Okay, let me try
to summarize what's going on here, and
then I have 15 minutes to talk about
social networks. Um, uh, should you use
fixed effects? Should you include the
average X? Depends upon the situation
and the tradeoffs. uh but these
strategies can work um uh given the
proper assumptions. If you're not
interested in measured group level
variables like the Z in my examples, the
fixed effect model is fine. Absolutely
fine. And when you see an econometrician
or an epidemiologist using a fixed
effect model, that's what's going on. Uh
if they mention some measured group
level thing, an alarm bell should go
off. Yeah.
Um
and uh I would prefer to use the the
latent munlac model, but you know me uh
but I'm not against the fixed effect
model either. The important thing is to
be transparent about the uh s demand and
be able to justify the model um uh
appropriately.
Um, and yeah, even if you know the mult
the multi-level model is not
appropriate, sometimes it's nice to fit
it and do the comparisons to see uh how
different it is because if it makes no
difference, that might imply there's no
group level confounding, right? If you
compare the the unsophisticated
multi-level model to the Munlac model
and they give the same estimate, then
either the they're both misspecified and
you're still confounded or neither is
confounded, right? So comparison is
really useful in this business when we
don't know the truth.
Okay. Are there any questions about this
before I move on?
Let that sink in for a little while over
the weekend and we'll talk about it next
week. Uh I've got a little bit of time
now and I want to talk about social
networks. I'll get started on this and
set it up and give you the road map, the
plan and then the next lecture we will
do it all. Okay. So, um, the data set
we're going to use here comes from one
of the field sites that my department
supports. This is a field site that was
founded by Jeremy Coer. It's in
Nicaragua. It's a a group of Native
Americans, Central American Native
Americans, uh, two language groups, um,
Mayanga and Mosquito. And, uh, this is a
really longunning project with
longitudinal data on household
production and social exchange between
the households. So there's lots of
there's lots of um uh gardening and
hunting in this uh community and food is
shared very widely but it's not shared
evenly. Right? So we're interested in
exchange between households in this data
set. You could do this at the individual
level. That's hard though because
there's still household effects. So I'm
going to just do household level
exchange and think about people within a
household as the same agent which is
bad. But this is an introductory
example. Okay. And uh the data for this
are in my package. They're called Koster
Leki who are the authors of this 2014
paper. Um 25 households in the village
of Arang. Uh that means there's 300
diads.
Yeah. Just from the the factorial of it
all, right? Um you're like, of course,
yes, obviously 300. No, it's not
obvious, but it's if you have a small
number, you have 25 of something and you
want all the pair-wise combinations,
there are 300. And that's just what that
equation is giving you. And there are,
this is a pretty rich data set. There
are um around 2,800 observed transfers
between households.
So, we're going to be interested here in
how much sharing is explained by
reciprocity. And that'll be defined as
the balance within diads.
Yeah, we'll we'll define that very very
uh technically when we start building
the model. Um and we also want to to
pull out generalized giving that is and
in particular the relationship between
that is general giving that isn't
related to the network right that isn't
related to relationships in a sense I'll
define network in a moment and in
particular the impact of wealth what is
the causal effect of household wealth on
transfers that is if a household is rich
does it give more if a household is poor
does it receive more or vice versa.
Yeah, we want to estimate that. Um those
are going to be our estimates. Okay, if
you just plot these data, so the the
core data is um diads where you
arbitrarily label the households in the
diad A and B and you could just make a
scatter plot where A gives to B and B
gives to A like this. Uh this is not a
great analytical strategy and I'm going
to build up to why as we go.
Unfortunately, there's a large
literature of bad papers that do this.
Um, but this is not give you an
estimate. This is massively confounded.
This is not an experiment. It's very
complicated what generates these data.
There's differences in wealth. There's
all kinds of things going on uh in these
scatter plots. And it doesn't look like
there's much reciprocity here. But uh to
spoil the excitement perhaps by the end
of this you will see there's a
tremendous amount of diad level
reciprocity in this community. But it's
not obvious in this scatter plot.
Um, so how do we draw the uh social
network owl? Let me start building it up
for you. Um, we're going to start with a
generative model. Then I'll introduce
the workflow and that's probably all the
time I have today. Maybe I can I can
show you the first social network model
and talk about how random effects enter
into it. Okay, so at the center of this
we have an outcome variable A gives to
B. We also have B gives to A, but
obviously it's the same diagram for
that, right? Because A and B are
arbitrary labels. Yeah, you can also put
uh GBA on the same DAG, but then the
thing like fills the screen really
rapidly if you do do uh both directions
on the same DAG. Um and so then we have
household A and household B that is
things about them, properties of them,
their identities uh or or any measured
feature of them. And what we're
interested in is the effect of a tie or
a friendship or some kind of social
relationship. And this is this
literature social network analysis. is
the idea that it's not a real network.
It's a metaphorical network uh of
relationships that bridge the community.
Yeah. Um and we're going to focus on
diatic relationships in this. When I say
it's not a real network, I mean like a
real network's like the internet. Stuff
flows through it. Yeah. Or the plumbing
in your building. These are actual
networks. But a social network is not
like that, right? Stuff doesn't actually
flow through it necessarily. Information
can flow flow through a social network.
Um, but it can also just jump. It
doesn't have to, right? Uh, we'll talk
about that later on. Whereas the only
way for packets to get someplace in the
internet is to go through a router,
right? It's the only way for it to move.
Um, so the we're going to try to
estimate these ties and these are
unknown parameters that are properties
of each diad,
right? And it could be binary, it could
be whether or not they're friends, or it
could be an intensity of a relationship,
right? How good of friends they are.
Yeah. Question.
>> Because when you put households, it
would be like there's several people in
the household.
>> Yes.
Absolutely. And the these are big
households uh actually in this community
because these are not nuclear families.
They're they're normal human beings.
They don't live in nuclear families.
>> Exactly. you say that there are
properties of the households. It could
be their um it could be uh kin overlap
between them. It could be lots of stuff
depends upon how you want to say it is
but there are things about the
compositions of households which are
influencing their relationship in this
community to put some meat on it. Uh the
like lots of Central American Native
Americans they're matrinal and matrinal.
Um, this is sort of, I think, the most
common uh, situation in Central America.
And that means that when a man marries,
he moves out of his extended family
house and moves in with his wife's
relatives. Nightmare scenario, right?
But he continues to send food to his mom
for the rest of her life.
So, she's in a household that's getting
gifts from him because of their kinship
relationship. Yeah. Does that make
sense? That's just one example. And
there'll be a bunch of examples that
generate things like this. It could just
be friends. It could be that they're
drinking buddies that are in these two
households and they're friends. Yeah.
And that sort of thing happens, too.
Okay. Does this make sense? Yeah. Um All
right. And then there's uh there's a tie
in the other direction. So, you don't
have to make what's called a directed
network, but we're going to we're going
to allow this is what allows us to check
for reciprocity. So, there's the
strength of a tie in one direction from
A to B. A thinks B is a really good
friend. And then there's the strength of
the tie in the other direction from B to
A. Maybe B doesn't agree,
right?
Does it make sense? It doesn't have to
be symmetrical, right? Um,
yes. I know a lot about Keanu Reeves. I
don't think he knows anything about me.
That would be an example of an asymmetry
there, right? Okay, great. Great. I
don't know why that example came to me,
but you've all understood. Okay. Oh,
yeah. So, here's where I start labeling
it. I say there's lots of aspects of the
households which could be causal, could
be locations. Households which are
spatially approximate are more likely to
do exchange. And so, I've done spatial
analysis on these sorts of data sets as
well to deal with things like that, but
also wealth and the the composition of
the household and so on. Okay.
Um so these tie uh variables tab and tba
are not directly observable but we can
collect data that is the observed
transfers between households which may
be caused by them right so that like the
tab and tba are their relationships
they're measures of the relationship of
the sharing relationship um and if we
have a finite sample we can get uh some
estimates of them with error
um I'm going to say The social network
is this pattern of directed exchange
that's that comes from estimating these
ties. And you can link them together in
a network diagram like on the right
here. And in the script for this
lecture, I've got all the code to draw
these network diagrams too if you want
to play around with them. Um I say that
yeah, social networks are abstractions.
I already gave you my version of this.
They're not data. that is just counting
up how many transfers went from A to B
and B to A is not the network because
there's different amounts of data and so
you have certainty about some ties more
than others right and additionally as
I'm going to problematize here there's
also generalized exchange that isn't
caused by the ties
some individuals just give stuff away to
everybody without regard to social
relationships yeah and some households
receive
because they're in need
from others. And so you have to partial
that out to get the network diagram. Is
this making some sense? I'm going to
build this up very incrementally. Um uh
next time um let me say a little bit
more about social network analysis and
and why all the bother I'm going to put
you through here is worthwhile. The the
field of social network analysis is rife
with with ad hocery that is just
arbitrary procedures for producing
estimates which have no generative logic
to them. and they're bad. It's just one
of the worst statistical areas I know.
Just really bad. Uh just a couple of of
really common things which are uh
systematically biased ways to analyze
network data. On the left here, there
are these things called diatic
association indices. And I give you a
definition here. You don't have to read
through this now. You can do it in the
comfort of your own home. But basically,
you take counts of behavior and you
construct normalized ratios for every
diad where you've divided out the sample
size in each diad.
That's bad because 1 over2 and 10 over
20 are the same ratio, but you have a
lot more statistical certainty about one
of them than the other, right? But this
is an extremely common way to analyze
social network data. Um, the other uh
set of methods are methods just for
rejecting null hypotheses that involve
matrix permutations. Um, I'm not I could
have a whole sermon against null
hypothesis testing here, but that's not
my rant about about these permutation
methods. My rant about the permutation
methods is they don't even work based
upon their goals, which which I hope you
will agree is regardless of your
statistical framework or philosophy a
bad thing, right? So there are perfectly
good and valid procedures for rejecting
null hypothesis if that's what you want
to do. But this does not this is not one
of them. Why not? A matrix is a
complicated thing and there's no unique
way to permute it.
Yeah, it's not like a vector where you
just randomize the indices. It's much
more complicated because usually you
want to hold the margins of the matrix
constant. That is like the total number
of of exchanges or something. And
there's not a unique way to do this. Uh
and so it's not an innocent thing just
to say permute uh something. So what are
we going to do instead? Um here's our
road map. Okay. So you're getting used
to this workflow diagram. Yeah. So on
the left we're going to have a
generative model. I've tried to define
for you our first little generative
model there with just the households and
the ties. And I'm going to build this up
into a set of statistical models to
answer our two estims. The first being
how much reciprocity there is in diads.
That [clears throat] is the balance in
exchange
after we've uh uh based on the network,
right? After we've removed generalized
giving and then secondly the effect of
wealth on transfers for if a household
is wealthy or poor, what does that do to
the to transfer patterns? Um we're going
to do synthetic data validation
throughout all of this. I think that
helps especially with things as
complicated as this. But I'll also be
constantly uh with each model I build,
I'll do a synthetic data validation,
data validation. Then I'll use the real
data and show you what we get. And then
we'll build the next model. Maybe
that'll make it spicier and you'll your
hold your interest better. I don't know.
We'll see. Um and then we've got to
produce predictions. Uh what we're going
to get is a posterior distribution of
networks, which is a not a a nice thing
to visualize. So I have made an
animation. Isn't it hypnotizing?
uh in the corner. Uh but there are other
things you might want to calculate uh
from the posterior distribution here and
it's just this is a highdimensional kind
of object and it it you have to think
very carefully about exactly what kind
of prediction you want. Okay, I've got
like one minute. Um maybe I should not
not proceed. Uh yeah, so I'll put this
slide up to say we're going to res start
here in the next lecture and we'll spend
the whole hour on social networks and
I'll definitely get through all of this
and we'll be able to I'll be able to
tell you how much balance there is in in
diads uh in this community. Okay, thank
you for your attention and have a good
weekend.